Introduction
============

The following selections are drawn from published translations of
various daimyo house codes. The included passages are intended to allow
some insight into the priorities individual daimyo placed on the conduct
of their retainers. It should be borne in mind that most of the
following, including the articles written by Toyotomi Hideyoshi (not a
daimyo himself as we consider the term), were composed for the benefit
of the daimyo's retainers.

The code written by Asakura Toshikage was intended for future Asakura
daimyo, and the Rokkaku's laws were composed for both the retainers and
future Rokkaku daimyo. Therefore, law as it related to the common folk
is only touched upon, although certain passages in the Chosokabe's
section throws some light on this area.

While tempting, I have not included redundancies. For instance, articles
condemning the heavy use of alcohol can be found in a number of the
codes. I elected to include only the Chosokabe's injunction, which is
nicely explicit. Also, a number of the daimyo gave strict orders against
fighting.

Imagawa Ujichika
================

From the Imagawa Kana Mokuroku, 1526

In dealing with those who have quarrelled, both parties should be
sentenced to death, irrespective of who is in the right or in the wrong.
In cases where one party to the dispute, although provoked and attacked,
controls himself, makes no defence and, as a result, is wounded his
appeal should be granted. While it is reprehensible that he should have
been a party to the dispute and perhaps contributed to its outbreak, his
respect for the law in not returning the attack merits consideration.
However, in cases where warriors come to the aid of one or other parties
to a dispute and then claim to be an injured party, their claims shall
not be entertained, even if they should be wounded or killed.

Chosokabe Motochika
===================

From the Chosokabe-shi Okitegaki, 1596

It should be the primary concern of everyone to train himself
unceasingly in military accomplishment. Those who tend to excel their
fellows in this should be given additional income. Particular attention
should be paid to musketry, archery, and horsemanship. The military code
is contained in a separate document.

It is only natural that services are demanded of those who hold fiefs,
and they must be carried out to the letter regardless of whether they
are large or small. Anyone late for logging or construction work will be
required to repeat the duty period as punishment. And anyone who comes
short of the food and provisions requested of him for work detail will
be required to supply as much again.

Concerning those who abscond: offenders must be punished whatever their
excuse and so also their relatives. Proper reward should be given
neighbours or friends who report anyone whose behaviour causes suspicion
that he is planning to desert. Those who have knowledge of such intent
and fail to report it will receive the same punishment as the offender.
Furthermore, a man who reports late for lumbering or construction and
leaves without getting permission from the magistrate will have his
lands declared forfeited. If a man deserts directly to another province,
punishment will also be imposed on his relatives. Similarly, if a man's
retainer (hikan) deserts \[from labour duty\], the master will be
penalized threefold.

Heavy drinking is prohibited for all people, high and low, to say
nothing of all magistrates. Furthermore: Regarding drunkards, the fine
for minor offenses will be three kan of coins, and appropriate
punishment (seibai) will be imposed for severe offenses. A man who cuts
or strikes others \[while drunk\] will have his head cut off.

As to illicit relations with another's wife: Although it is obvious,
unless the guilty pair kill themselves, both of them should be executed.
If approval of relatives is obtained, revenge may be undertaken, but
unnatural cruelty will constitute a crime. If the husband fails to kill
the man, or if he is away at the time the offense becomes known, the
people of the village should kill the offender. In addition: If a woman
has a reputation, the \[marriage\] contract is to be broken.

When there is not a man in the house, no male-masseurs, peddlers,
travelling sarugaku performers and musicians, solicitors for religious
contributions (banjin), or even relatives-shall set foot in the house.
If someone is ill and if the relatives approve, a visit may be made, but
then only in daytime. Even the magistrate must carry on his business
outside the gate. However, this does not apply to parents, sons, and
brothers \[of the household head\].

Whoever discovers that anyone, whether vassal or farmer, is concealing
the existence of \[untaxed\] fields and reports it to the lord, will be
rewarded strikingly. Acting on such information, the magistrate will
base his ruling on the land survey register. If it becomes clear that a
vassal concealed the field, he will be severely punished. And if it is a
farmer who concealed it, he will be forced to pay double the tax due
since the land survey, after which he will be banished. If he pleads
hardship at this, he will have his head cut off.

With regard to family succession: It is necessary to notify the lord and
receive his permission, even if the heir is the head's real child. It is
strictly forbidden to decide succession matters privately. Furthermore:
One must also request permission to become guardian for a minor.

As regards family name and succession designation for loyal retainers:
If a vassal commits a crime and has to be punished, his family name will
not be affected if the offense was a minor one. But if he commits a
major crime, his punishment should include the loss of his family name.

Hojo Soun
=========

From the Soun-ji Dono Nijuichi Kajo, circa 1495

Do not think your swords and clothes should be as good as those of other
people. Be content as long as they do not look awful. Once you start
acquiring what you do not have and become even poorer, you will become a
laughingstock.

Whenever you have a little bit of time for yourself, read a book. Always
carry something with characters written on it with you and look at it
when no one is looking. Unless you accustom yourself to them, asleep or
awake, you will forget them. The same is true of writing.

There is the saying, "Do everything with others, and you'll have no
trouble." Rely on others in everything.

When you have to walk past the elders lined up in the corridor for the
master's audience, you must bend at the hips and lower your hands. It is
absolutely out of the question not to show deference or humility but to
stomp past. All samurai must behave humbly, deferentially.

Anyone without any knowledge of tanka composition must be said to be
untalented and shallow. Study it.

Always work at reading, writing, martial skills, archery, and horse
riding. There is no need to detail this. Hold literary skills in your
left hand, martial skills in your right. This is the law from ancient
times. Never neglect it.

